Resource - 

encoder - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDN649X_acE



transformer models are of 3 types broadly speaking

1 encoder
2 decoder
3 encider-decoder or seq2seq

bert is an encoder only model
gpt is a decoder only model

encoder - job is to create encodings of the sentences and words and is used for sentiment analysis 

decoder - crunches some number and uses the ouput of the encoder to translate from one language to another


encoder consists of -

1 word embedding as to be able to predict next word and also to cluster similar words together basically converts words to numbers using neural net

eg - pizza is great!    <-----| ___ different words greate and awesome but of same meaning
     pizza is awesome!  <-----|

2 positional encoding for learning grammatical meaning of words or word order
 
eg - ram eats pizza    <-----| ___ same words used but change of order chages the meaning
     pizza eats ram    <-----|


3 self attention or attention in encoder here, although there are differnet types of attention.
  attentions job is to keep track of relatioin between words

  eg - the pizza came out of the oven and it tasted good!
      
       here it can refer to both pizza and oven but correct is pizza.

    self attention keeps track of similarity of all of the other words in the sentence and to the word itself

    after similarity is calculated then the words encoding is focused

    if the similarities are calculated correctly then pizza would be having a greater impact on it than oven has!

    all three embedding are taken in consideration for the last decision and these are called context aware embedding (CAE) or contexualization embedding

    context aware as understanding of the sentence is done. these types of transformers can cluster similar contextual of sentences and also similar contextual docs

    The ability to cluster similar sentences and docs is the foundation for Retrieval-Augumented Generation or RAG.


    RAG works by breaking a doc into blocks of texts and then using encoder only transformer to create CAE for each one.

    then if a question is asked then CAE is created and compared to the texts.